the president is a raving lunatic he is
not well those are not my words those
the words of Andrew Gilliam the former
Democratic mayor of Tallahassee who came
in second and last year's race for
governor in Florida he was echoing what
has become mainstream thinking now about
the mental health of the President of
the United States during a week in which
the president has said he is the King of
the Jews the second coming of God the
chosen one it is the same week in which
even though he sees himself as a king of
God a chosen one Denmark somehow found
the strength to defy him and refused to
sell Greenland to the United States and
so the president the king to God says he
canceled the trip to Denmark even though
he probably canceled the trip to Denmark
because he knows President Obama is
scheduled to go to Denmark a few weeks
after what would have been the Trump
trip in President Obama would surely get
a much more positive reception from a
much much bigger crowd than Donald Trump
could have mustered in Denmark all of
that sounds pretty crazy too sober
careful politicians like Andrew Gilliam
who have never before called a political
opponent a raving lunatic well we told
you so
one month into the Trump presidency we
had our first discussion of the
president's mental health on this
program with psychologist John Gartner
and former professor of psychiatry at
Harvard Medical School
Lance notice if we could construct a
psychiatric Frankenstein monster we
could not create a leader more
dangerously mentally ill than Donald
Trump he's a paranoid psychopathic
narcissist who's divorced from reality
and lashes out impulsively it has
imagined enemies he lies because of his
sociopathic tendencies that Arthur
Gardner was talking about that he lives
in the way anyone who scams people that
does that he's trying to sell an idea or
a product by telling you something
that's untrue there's that lying there's
also the kind of lying he has that is in
a way more serious that he has a loose
grip on reality
if he was a paranoid schizophrenic and
he was wearing a tinfoil hat
then he wouldn't be elected president
but he's just saying enough as it were
to pass but actually detached from
reality as dr. dodo said so that what is
real is fluid
it's totally malleable according to his
personality disorder
later that year dr. Gartner and dr.
DotA's contributed articles to the book
the dangerous case of Donald Trump 27
psychiatrists and mental health experts
assess a president a new edition of that
book was published this year with 10
more entries which then changed the
subtitle to 37 psychiatrists and mental
health experts assess a president in
that book dr. DotA's writes mr. Trump's
sociopathic characteristics are
undeniable they create a profound danger
for Americans democracy and safety over
time these characteristics will only
become worse and joining our discussion
now once again is dr. Lance totus a
former assistant professor of psychiatry
at Harvard Medical School and an analyst
at the Boston psychoanalytic Society and
Institute dr. nodas thank you very much
for joining us once again and you told
us in 2017 that it was going to get
worse it will your your words will only
become worse is that what we're seeing
this week absolutely Donald Trump
because he has a fundamental need to be
all powerful and all loved can't stand
challenges and the nature of democracy
is that it challenges people we have
more than one opinion so the more it was
predictable that it once he got into a
position where people would challenge
him there are two parties he would
become more unhinged in the interview
today for example on the South Lawn of
the White House he showed that as you
watched him respond to people the more
they challenged him the more he ranted
he stopped responding to the questions
and instead he started to talk about how
people were agents of fate fake news he
he said that they would go out of
business soon who basically they would
die
that NBC and and the new york times
would be dead within six years this is
the same kind of thing that he did when
he was a candidate in what he suggested
that someone protesting at his campaign
rally be taken out and beaten up he
can't stand anything that disagrees with
him and the more you challenge him the
more unhinged he becomes the more
paranoid and the more violent
potentially today he's saying that the
reason he's cancelling his trip to
Denmark is the Prime Minister used the
word absurd to describe Donald Trump's
idea and he kept saying it repeatedly in
that to talk to reporters you're talking
about today repeatedly saying that was
such a nasty word it was such a bad word
to use the word absurd I wanted I want
to hold that in our minds when we
consider Donald Trump's relationship to
Kim jong-un who he used to call rocket
man that's what Donald Trump used to
call him and at the same time that he
was calling him rocket man Kim jong-un
was calling him the mentally deranged us
dotard and and then eventually after all
of that dr. Donald Trump then eventually
turned into the guy who loves Kim Jong
let's let's listen to that part of it
and then we fell in love okay no really
he wrote me beautiful letters and
they're great letters we fell in love
what are we seeing in all of that he
cancels a trip because of the word
absurd the guy who calls him a mentally
deranged US dotard is someone he then
eventually falls in love with well he he
doesn't really love anyone except
himself that's not a slur that's a
psychological fact people like him are
about him and we see this not only with
the North Korean leader but with all the
people he surrounded himself for most of
his life who are now recognized as
criminals as long as they stay loyal to
him he loves them as soon as they
challenge him as soon as they disagree
then they're terrible people which he
has said about each of these folks so of
course it means nothing he never loved
him he only used him and if he's not
useful to him then he stops loving it
that's part of the essential emptiness
of Donald Trump he doesn't have real
relationships with people that let maybe
his personal family we don't know about
that but you can see that he discards
anyone who doesn't fit his personal
needs
which makes him unable to really relate
to our allies as well as our enemies and
doctor we need your analysis of a
president who stands up and compares
himself to a king refers to himself as
King of the Jews refers to himself in a
god-like way turns to the heavens today
and calls himself a the chosen one what
is that well it's obviously grandiosity
but I want to make clear that there are
a lot of grandiose people there are a
lot of people who are narcissistic
Donald Trump goes way beyond that there
is a fundamental way in which as I said
he's empty there's something
fundamentally different about him from
normal people there is there's a it's
it's a psychotic like state the more you
press him the more you see how
disorganized
empty he is the more he flies into a
disorganized rage so yeah and by the way
his terms of being God he also made
several what you might call Freudian
slips during the interview today
he kept mixing up who he was and who the
country was he said I have the best
economy I not the country I defeated the
caliphate
it's not just a slip of the tongue he
really doesn't get it he thinks of
himself as a dictator and it's all him
and no one else really matters dr. Lance
notice thank you for joining us once
again and thank you for starting this
conversation here on this program back
in the what was the second month
basically of the Trump presidency when I
know it wasn't comfortable for people in
in your profession to be entering this
discussion but as you said at that time
you felt more driven by the duty to warn
and that's what you've been joined in
tonight we really appreciate that sure
thank you doctor thanks for checking out
our YouTube channel subscribe by
clicking on the button below for more
from the last word and the rest of MSNBC